# AI-Legislation-Project
A streamlined showcase of the document embedding and ML work that goes into the legislative writing assistant I created as part of my master's thesis at CU.


The rapid uptake of AI across multiple sectors and capacity for continuous adaptation pose serious challenges to regulation of the technology. Although this regulation aims to ensure the compliance of AI with ethical and productive societal contributions while maintaining innovative freedom, the United States federal government has provided limited regulatory leadership on the subject. By consequence, U.S. states have been tasked with developing individual policy approaches to AI issues. Leaving this process to states creates the potential for gaps in legislative policies between governing bodies, inhibiting effective governmental addresses to an already difficult to regulate subject. Moreover, it can give rise to unforeseeable harms by AI products on economies, societies, and individuals. 

For this project, I build upon the research I conducted for my master’s thesis in the Information Science department at the University of Colorado, Boulder. I leverage advanced document embedding techniques to analyze 469 proposed AI-related bills across 49 U.S. jurisdictions during the 2023 and 2024 legislative sessions. Vector-based similarity measures are used to assess the diversity of policy issues within each jurisdiction and cohesion of addresses across jurisdictions, which are showcased in an interactive dimensionality reduction visualization that can be viewed [here]([url](https://elijahboykoff.github.io/AI-Legislation-Project/umap_plot.html)). Machine learning models trained on the document vectors and other legislation metadata are used to predict bill outcome (enactment or failure). The most accurate model predicts bill outcome with 87% accuracy. This model is utilized to predict the outcome of bills from 2024 for which outcome was determined after the time of data collection, doing so with 70% accuracy. This prototypic predictive modeling is employed in order to explore the potential for practical application in legislative contexts.

Moving forward, I continue to refine my machine learning models to increase their effective classification and use in real-world regulatory framework development. This involves the inclusion of additional features that may be indicative of bill success and the extraction of latent components of bill text that contribute most to eventual outcome. Additionally, this project makes up the foundation of my work as a Research Associate for the University of Miami Law School's Law and AI Research Program. Through this program, I plan to submit this work for publication in leading AI, computing, and policy journals such as AI & Society and Policy & Internet.

